---
title: "Budgeting"
date: 2021-04-25
draft: true
---

When you hear the term "budget", do you immediately think something like...

- Saying "no" to things I want
- Making plans doomed to failure
- Locking myself in
- Not being able to have fun
- Money fights with my spouse
- Not being able to afford nice things

If this is you, there's no shame in that. The term rarely means anything fun. If you're reading this article, then hear me out: allow me to explain what my wife and I do (and millions of couples besides us), how it improved our marriage, allowed us to have _more_ fun than before, and gave us hope and a plan for our future.

## The "Envelope" System

Also called "Zero-based budgeting", the Envelope system proposes the following mental model:

You have things in life that you _need_ to spend money on, things you _want_ to spend money on, and things you want to save for. Make a list of everything you can think of. **It's important not to pre-judge** at this point. Just like brainstorming, every idea is thrown on the list, no matter how good or bad it _might_ be. We'll prioritize later, for now just get everything down.

Now get an envelope for each item. This might be a physical envelope, but that won't work for many people in today's world. There are several apps to help you do this, the most famous being [YNAB](https://www.youneedabudget.com/) and [Every Dollar](https://www.ramseysolutions.com/ramseyplus/everydollar). I've also heard of [GoodBudget](https://goodbudget.com/). We'll talk about their costs later, but for the moment, just know that these apps help you maintain virtual envelopes that work with credit cards, electronic banking, etc.

(There are several free alternatives that I strongly advise **against**. They're not bad apps, but they typically don't support this style of budgeting and instead make their money by selling you more debt. The most famous example is Mint. Avoid these.)

You might have a large number of very specific envelopes, or you might prefer a simpler set of broader categories. You can always change this later, pick whichever approach makes you happiest. [Here's a pretty good article on the topic with some example lists to get you started](https://www.youneedabudget.com/how-many-categories-should-i-have-in-ynab/).

Ok, so now you have an envelope for every category of thing you want to spend money on. Now, take all your liquid money and put it into a pile. This includes:

- Checking accounts
- Savings accounts
- Money markets
- HSA/FSA accounts
- Anything else not invested toward retirement

If it's a dollar you own, then it's a dollar you need to give a job. Even if it's already a dollar that has a job, like an HSA fund, still pile it in. Just because we know which envelope it'll go in, doesn't mean we skip putting it in there.

Now you have one giant pile of all the money you possess and a pile of envelopes for the things you want to spend (or save) it on. **Now you prioritize the money by putting it into each envelope.** Need $200 for groceries this week? Stick $200 in that envelope. Want to go to a fancy restaurant next week? Put the money you need into that envelope. Maybe throw some money into an emergency fund envelope, just in case your car gives up the ghost tomorrow (more about that elsewhere). Always wanted to go on a fancy vacation? Chuck some dough in that envelope too.

Keep putting money into the envelopes, and moving money between the envelopes, until you've hit as many priorities as you can manage. It's ok if you can't fully fund everything right away, you're just getting started here and this process will keep going.

Now here's the core part. No money gets spent--_by anyone, for anything_\--without coming out of the appropriate envelope. You and your spouse can agree to move money between envelopes if you wish. When any new money is brought in, whether from a regular paycheck, commission checks, credit card rewards, investment income, or anywhere else, it goes into an envelope. No one can force this on you, and, if you're married, your spouse must agree and abide by the rules, or no budget system can help you.

Did you notice that, though? You get to decide where the money gets allocated. Want a shiny motorcycle? Want a vacation to the Swiss Alps? Want to buy the girl of your dreams a diamond ring? That budget is yours to do with as you please. Of course there will be high-priority categories on there, like paying the rent/mortgage, keeping the lights on and food on the table, etc., but these become intentional choices now rather than mysterious black holes that suck in your money from afar. You choose, in advance, to allocate money toward those needs, and you choose the order of your priorities.

It's important to remember that money is always coming in and going out. How exactly you make sure that money goes where it's most needed is up to you and the system you choose to use. My wife and I use YNAB, and do our initial allocations into the appropriate envelopes at the beginning of each month. We've done this long enough that every dollar we spend during the month is a dollar we owned and allocated at the beginning of the month. That might not be where you're at, you might want to allocate the money as soon as each paycheck arrives. Either way, a budget gives you the confidence to pay the bills from the envelopes, because if the money's in there, you weren't planning to spend it on anything else.

Don't worry about making mistakes, nobody's first budget is perfect, and for that matter no budget is ever perfect. [YNAB has a great discussion about this](https://www.youneedabudget.com/the-four-rules/).

You'll be amazed how you feel a few months in, though. You'll feel like you got a raise. No, really. It's so empowering to 100% decide, in advance, what your money is for, to consciously order your priorities. Maybe you've wanted a particular vacation for years, but could never afford it. With a budget, you can easily determine, in bite-sized decisions, that "no, this month I'm going to put $100 toward that vacation instead of going on a fancy dinner" or "... instead of going to the salon," or just shuffle leftover money from other envelopes at the end of the month. Whatever is a lower priority can be consciously set aside to pursue what you want more. Save little by little, and you might be surprised by how quickly you can save substantial amounts of money to do that thing you _most_ want to do.

## Marital Bliss
